Welcome to JW Broadcasting®
for November 2024.
On September 14, 2024,
the 156th class of Gilead graduated.
This is the culmination
of five months of intensive study
and spiritual refinement.
What kind words of encouragement
lie in store in this graduation?
As we watch this portion of the program,
look for something
that you can apply in your life.
For our introductory chairman comments,
we thought we’d talk
for just a couple of moments
about what a privilege it is
to be used by Jehovah.
And when we were kids,
sometimes we played games
in the schoolyard, didn’t we?
And maybe if it was a team sport,
sometimes there would be
two captains selected,
and then the captains would choose
from among the kids playing the game
—you know?—
who was going to be on their team.
And what would happen?
They would pick the best players first
—the most skilled, the most talented.
And our goal was just not to be picked last.
But that’s OK.
But the point of the illustration is
that each captain had in his mind
what he valued
among those potential players,
and then that guided his choices.
Well, Jehovah has a work to do,
and he uses us humans to do
an important part of it.
But whom will Jehovah choose
to use in his service?
What does he value?
What kind of people is Jehovah
pleased to use to do his work?
Well, on that point,
let me make one clarification
—a little context.
When we talk about (in these comments)
being used by Jehovah,
we’re not specifically
talking about privileges,
because privileges come and go
and very often it’s timing
and availability and need
that play a big part.
But, rather,
we’re talking about being the kind of people
who cultivate the spiritual qualities
that Jehovah values and then, therefore,
are useful to him in whatever assignment
or work he has to do at a given time.
Well, on that point,
this summer most of us enjoyed watching
The Good News According to Jesus: Episode 1.
And the events captured in that episode
highlight for us in a special way
what Jehovah values in humans
and therefore whom he is pleased to use.
For example, whom would Jehovah use
to be the earthly mother
of his only-begotten Son?
Would it be someone,
maybe, from a prominent family?
maybe someone respected in the community?
maybe someone wealthy so that his Son
would be sure to be cared for?
maybe someone
from the capital city of Jerusalem?
Well, that might be OK.
But what does the Bible say?
Turn with me, please,
to the book of Luke chapter 1,
and let’s read together Luke 1:26, 27:
“In her sixth month, the angel Gabriel
“was sent from God
to a city of Galilee named Nazareth,
“to a virgin promised in marriage
“to a man named Joseph of David’s house,
and the name of the virgin was Mary.”
Now, we remember from this summer’s video
that this is whom Jehovah chose
—Mary, a humble young woman
of little means materially
from an insignificant city called Nazareth.
But why?
Why did Jehovah choose Mary?
What mattered most to him?
What did he see in Mary
that assured him she was the right choice?
Well, in Mary,
Jehovah saw a deeply spiritual,
humble, obedient young woman.
And as we get to know Mary
in the Bible account,
it becomes very clear why Jehovah chose
her for this important assignment.
For example, as soon as she understood
from the angel Gabriel
what the assignment was
that Jehovah had in mind for her
—this assignment
that would require a miracle,
this assignment
that would change her life forever—
what was her reaction?
Verse 38:
“Then Mary said: ‘Look!
“‘Jehovah’s slave girl!
May it happen to me
according to your declaration.’”
And there she is.
We remember that moment in the video
—humble obedience and submission
to Jehovah’s will.
Did Mary have questions?
Undoubtedly.
But she didn’t need to know
all the answers to those questions.
All she needed to know was that the request
was coming from Jehovah.
And so the answer was yes
—humble obedience and submission
to Jehovah’s will.
And we further see what Jehovah saw in Mary
when we hear her words
that she spoke at Luke 1:46-55.
We won’t read that, but we remember this
little speech that she gave there.
And here’s the moment from the video
with these two women
with very unique circumstances
as they were reflecting
on what Jehovah was doing in their case.
And Mary, as we know, in these few verses,
makes copious references
to passages in the Hebrew Scriptures.
And she shows herself
to be one who loved God’s Word,
who treasured it, who read it, studied it,
and meditated on it.
And in her situation, in reading God’s Word,
she felt a connection to Hannah
and she felt a connection to the psalmist.
And these are the things
that motivated and formed her words.
So Jehovah used humble,
spiritual, obedient Mary
to be the earthly mother of his Son.
Well, another example: When the time came
to announce the birth of his Son,
whom did Jehovah choose to tell?
Would it be
the prominent officials in Bethlehem?
Would it be the leaders of the Sanhedrin?
maybe the high priest? maybe Herod?
Well, what does the Bible say?
Turn to Luke 2:8, 9
—Luke 2:8:
“There were also in the same region
“shepherds living out of doors
“and keeping watch in the night
over their flocks.
“Suddenly Jehovah’s angel stood before them,
and Jehovah’s glory gleamed around them
and they became very fearful.”
And what was the announcement?
Verse 11: “For today there was born to you
in David’s city a savior,
who is Christ the Lord.”
Yes, Jehovah appeared
to these humble shepherds
—men who would treasure
this privilege to see the infant, God’s Son,
men whose reaction
would reassure Joseph and Mary
about how special this child was
and, of course, would bring
praise and glory to Jehovah’s name.
Well, soon the time came for Mary and Joseph
to go to the temple
for the purification offering.
And so whom would Jehovah use
to welcome his Son
and even to acknowledge Jesus’ future role
as the Messiah?
Well, perhaps Mary thought
that the officiating priests
might make some comment
about what Jesus’ future role would be.
But whom did Jehovah choose to do this?
The faithful man Simeon.
Simeon had been faithful to Jehovah
his whole life.
And Jehovah appreciated and loved him
for his faithful course
and had promised Simeon
that he would have this privilege
to see the Christ before he died.
And finally, whom would Jehovah
use to further emphasize the importance
of this infant child
and to proclaim it
to all those in the temple area?
Faithful Anna, who was always present
and “never missing from the temple.”
She was steadfast in her theocratic routine
and in her appreciation for pure worship.
Jehovah could count on her
to be present that day
when Joseph and Mary
would arrive with Jesus Christ.
Well, thinking about those whom Jehovah used
to carry out his will in these various ways
in connection with his Son
and thinking about what a privilege it is
to be used for anything in Jehovah’s service
leads us to ask the question,
“Well, how can I be the kind of person
whom Jehovah would be pleased to use?”
Well, as these examples teach us,
it’s by focusing
on what matters most to Jehovah.
And what is it?
Is it prominence?
Is it fame?
Is it wealth?
Is it personality?
No.
It’s spirituality, isn’t it?
And so we become useful to Jehovah
when we cultivate
these beautiful spiritual qualities
that Jehovah appreciates.
And many of them are the same ones that Mary
and the shepherds
and Simeon and Anna showed,
such as deep spirituality, humility,
and obedience (like Mary);
appreciation for spiritual things
(like those humble shepherds);
a faithful, waiting attitude (like Simeon);
and constancy in your theocratic routine
(like Anna).
Jehovah sees such sincere efforts
and beautiful spiritual qualities,
and he values them.
It is the qualities that matter to Jehovah.
It is substance that matters to Jehovah,
‘not what appears to the eyes
but what is in the heart.’
So as you go to your assignments now,
remember these fine examples
of men and women who pleased Jehovah,
not because they were impressive
by the world’s standards,
but because they developed qualities
that Jehovah appreciated
and a life course
of humble, loyal service to him.
These are ones whom Jehovah appreciated,
ones whom Jehovah could use to do his will.
And always treasure the privilege
of being used by Jehovah.
And we know that the rest of the program
will help us to be the kind of people
whom Jehovah loves, approves of,
and is pleased to use in his service.
The next part of the program
is The Inside Story.
And the operative word is “story,” isn’t it?
Because each one of Jehovah’s servants
has a story and has a journey with Jehovah,
and we always enjoy hearing
about some of the stories
of our Gilead students.
So in this episode of The Inside Story,
we will have interviews
spanning four different countries
and also a brief tour
of a notable Bible land.
So please enjoy The Inside Story.
Welcome to this edition of The Inside Story.
Today we will get to know 6
of the 48 students
representing the 156th class of Gilead.
To my left, I have
Sister Hanta Razafimandimby
from Madagascar.
Next to Hanta is Adalia and Mannie Luna
from the United States.
To my far right
is Shimon and Yoshi Hori from Japan.
And last but not least,
we have brother Marco Caproni from Italy.
Welcome, to all six of you,
and we look forward to hearing
what you have to share with us today.
Why don’t we start by first hearing
how long you’ve been
in your respective Bethels
and what your current assignments are.
Why don’t we start with you, Hanta?
I’ve been serving at the Madagascar Bethel
for 24 years,
and currently I’m serving
on one of the translation teams there.
Excellent.
Adalia?
We are currently serving
in the United States branch,
at the Wallkill complex for about 13 years.
And my assignment
is actually a split assignment
between Food Service
and the Health Care Department.
OK. Very good.
Mannie?
And I, along with Adalia, have been serving
at the United States branch
for about 13 years,
and I currently work
with the Service Department.
Very good.
Let’s switch over to you, Shimon, please.
I have been
in the Japan branch for 16 years,
and my assignment
is the Computer Department.
OK. Very good.
And Yoshi?
And I’ve been in the Japan branch
for six years,
and now I serve in the Legal Department.
OK. Very good.
And, please, Marco.
I’ve been serving in the Italy branch in Rome
for 18 years and, actually, I’m serving
in the Public Information Department.
Excellent.
Well, now that we’ve had a chance
to learn a little bit about you,
let’s start off with Shimon.
Shimon, . . .
Yes.
. . . I understand that you were baptized
at ten years of age.
Yeah.
Can you tell us about what your father did
to help you make spiritual progress
at such a young age?
Well, my father was very creative.
Hmm.
Explain.
For example, as a family,
we enjoyed playing a game
named Bible golf.
OK.
It’s a simple game.
So the winner is
whoever can open to a specific Bible verse
in the fewest attempts.
So if I can open the verse
in the first attempt, it’s a hole in one.
All right.
And three attempts, it’s a birdie
—something like this.
And another game I can still remember is
the Jehovah’s Witnesses game of life,
which is a board game with two circles on it.
And you can start from the outside circle,
which represents non-Witness life.
Non-Witness life—OK.
And if you progress properly
—Bible study and dedication,
assembly or convention—
then you can enter into the inner circle,
which represents the Witness life.
Aha.
But there is a time limit called Armageddon.
So when the alarm goes off,
you can enter into Paradise
if you are in the inner circle.
And it’s so much fun
because there are
also stumbling blocks along the way.
OK.
And your father came up with this game?
Yes.
Wow!
Obviously, he was very creative.
Did he do anything else to help you?
Well,
when the Knowledge  book came out,
he asked me and my sister
if we wanted
to get baptized within six months.
And we said yes.
From then on,
each morning he would leave the house,
knock on the door,
introduce himself as Brother Hori,
and conduct a Bible study with us.
And we had to serve tea for him.
Now I understand he wanted to teach us
that a Bible study
is a serious thing in our life.
It’s unique, but I was able
to get baptized within a year.
Well, obviously it worked
because here you are with us today.
Well, once you were baptized,
was it always smooth sailing for you, Shimon?
Honestly, no, not always.
As I grew older, I started struggling
because I wanted to be exemplary
in the congregation
but I liked computers very much,
so I wanted to be
an engineer in an IT company.
Mhm.
Big dreams, huh?
Yeah.
OK.
But eventually, the Timothy drama came out.
And in that drama, the apostle Paul
encouraged Timothy not to use his skill
in Satan’s world but for Jehovah.
That was the turning point for me.
Instead of pursuing secular work,
I started pioneering,
and then I came to love it.
Oh, wise choice.
Let’s talk to your wife, Yoshi,
for just a moment.
Now, Yoshi, you were born in Japan.
But I understand that you and your family
moved around a bit.
Can you tell us a little bit about that?
Yes.
So my father
(he wasn’t a Witness at the time),
his work necessitated
that we move around quite a bit.
So I remember I was five
when we were living in Osaka, in Japan.
Then we moved to London, in Britain.
We were there for four years,
and then after that,
we all moved to Scotland.
So I lived in Glasgow for five years.
After that, we all moved back to Tokyo.
And later, when I was an adult,
I moved on my own
to serve where the need was great
in Tanzania.
I stayed there for six years,
and after that, I moved back.
And now we’re here.
And we’re happy to have you.
Well, now, you’ve gotten to live in some
pretty fascinating places over those years.
What did you learn about yourself
and culture from living in those places?
Well, you know, when I was young,
I honestly didn’t really appreciate it.
But now that I’ve grown older,
I feel that it’s taught me to understand
that there are so many different ways
of looking at something
and so many different ways
of doing something.
But, actually,
all of them are really, really good.
And it’s a blessing to have so many
different personalities with us.
And I just love working with this
variety of brothers and sisters now.
Well, obviously, looking back on it,
you learned quite a bit.
Thank you for sharing that.
Let’s switch over to you now, Hanta.
Now, I understand that you were not raised
as one of Jehovah’s Witnesses.
Can you tell us a little bit
about your background, please?
I was raised in a religious family.
We used to go to a Protestant church
every week,
and my siblings and I
even attended Sunday school for a while.
OK.
Now, although your father
never became
one of Jehovah’s Witnesses,
how was he instrumental
in leading you to the truth?
My father welcomed
anyone who knocked at our door
in the name of religion.
And Jehovah’s Witnesses
were among these people.
Every time they stopped by,
they would leave magazines, books, brochures.
And what I really appreciated
in those publications
is God’s promise of a paradise earth.
I really liked the pictures of Paradise
in those publications,
so much so that my siblings and I
would trace those pictures,
paint them, and hang them on the wall.
Your parents were OK
with you redecorating like this?
One day, our father bought
the Live Forever  book from the Witnesses.
And it was then
that a Bible study was started.
From the first meeting I attended,
I was so impressed
by the warm welcome I received
that I said to myself,
‘I want to belong to these people.’
Ah.
Eventually, all my siblings and I,
along with our mother, embraced the truth.
Actually, one of my brothers
and I got baptized together on the same day.
Ah, that must have been
really special for you.
Thank you for sharing that with us, Hanta.
We’ll come back to you.
Let’s go over to Adalia now.
Now, Adalia, you were born,
raised, and spent your early teenage years
in Brooklyn, New York.
How was that for you,
growing up around world headquarters?
It was a beautiful, positive experience.
Getting to see self-sacrificing
brothers and sisters
give all they could to Jehovah
and also to see
how happy and excited they were
in their service was a beautiful example.
This helped instill in me goals
and really plant seeds
and put in me the desire
to want to live that same kind of life.
Oh, we could understand that.
Now, eventually,
you and your family moved to Florida.
That’s where you met Mannie.
You two were eventually married.
You should have stayed in Brooklyn, see?
But you met Mannie, and you two were married.
What next?
So shortly after we got married,
before our first year anniversary,
we started regular pioneering.
Then after that, we were invited
to serve where the need is great
in a very rural part of Florida
—kind of the orange grove region.
It’s very different to where we both grew up.
We were both used to the city life.
But we went to that area
and immersed ourselves in the congregation
—beautiful, young congregation—
which worked hard in the ministry.
And we grew to really love those brothers.
And Jehovah blessed the hard work
that was being done in that area.
How long were you there?
We were there for ten years.
And during that time period,
that one congregation that we were in
actually turned into five congregations.
Wow!
Five congregations over ten years, excellent!
Now, Mannie, clearly
you and Adalia
—you were busy in Jehovah’s service.
Was that the end of the extent
of your pursuing theocratic goals?
No, not at all.
Adalia and I made an effort
to live a simple life
so that we could give all we could
to Jehovah without any distractions,
and that allowed us to pioneer.
It also allowed us to move to that area
where there was a greater need.
But to further make ourselves available,
we applied to Bethel several times.
OK, that’s a little nebulous
—several times.
How many times did you apply to Bethel?
It was about only 12 times.
Twelve times?
What part of no did you not understand?
Perseverance.
Please tell us
what caused you to keep applying
when you weren’t receiving
a response to come?
Yeah, as you can see,
certainly we were very persistent.
We wanted to keep our options open
and allow Jehovah
to decide where we would serve.
But, you know, when we look back at it,
we realize that applying to Bethel
all those times
and not getting accepted
was just simply because it wasn’t our time.
Hmm, what do you mean by that,
wasn’t your time?
Well, you see,
there we were in our assignment
but wanting to be at Bethel.
Jehovah knew we had a lot to learn,
and he allowed that assignment
to give us the training that we needed.
And those 12 applications,
or those 12 times that we applied,
taught us a lot.
It taught us patience,
taught us to wait on Jehovah,
taught us appreciation.
So even though we wanted
to make ourselves available
to do more by means of Bethel service,
there were a lot of lessons
that we still needed to learn.
We needed to learn to focus on, love,
and appreciate the privileges
we already had up to that point
in order to be able
to fully appreciate
our future Bethel assignment.
And what a blessing it was being with those
brothers and sisters for those years
and being able to witness that growth!
It was amazing!
And we fondly look back at it,
and these certainly are memories
that we truly treasure.
Well, those are some valuable lessons
that you learned.
We’re glad that Jehovah
gave you that training.
We’re sure it will serve you well.
Let’s shift over to you now, Marco.
Would you mind telling us a little bit
about your family background?
Sure.
So growing up, I was raised as a Catholic,
and I used to go
every Sunday to the church.
Yeah.
But then when I was 17 years old,
my uncle began to study the Bible
with Jehovah’s Witnesses.
And observing the big changes
that he made in his life for good
and how happy he became
made me really curious about the Bible.
What a powerful book it is,
to change life in such a way!
And so I accepted to study the Bible as well.
And when I was 19 years old, I got baptized.
And later on,
I started to serve as a regular pioneer.
I attended the Ministerial Training School,
or MTS.
And yes, as I told you,
for the last 18 years,
I’ve been serving at Bethel in Rome.
OK, excellent.
Now, during your time here at Gilead,
it became clear that you have
a real love for history, Marco.
We all saw it.
Was there anything
that was part of the Gilead curriculum
that particularly caught your attention?
Yes, here at Gilead
we have many artifacts on display.
But there is something in particular
that caught my attention,
and I brought it here to show you.
Oh, really?
Does the Gilead Office
know that you have this?
I will bring it back soon.
All right.
What do we have?
It’s a coin.
OK.
Tell us about it.
Yeah.
This coin is an authentic coin
minted by Emperor Nero in 66 C.E.
He wanted to celebrate a period of peace.
In fact, if you look carefully on one side,
you can see a door.
OK.
Now, I can see that.
But can you all see this?
Oh, OK.
Oh, wait a minute.
There it is; there it is.
So this door is the door
of an ancient temple in Rome.
And this door was kept closed
during a period of peace.
And in fact,
Nero wanted to boast that he was capable
of bringing peace to the empire.
But this was 66 C.E.,
and the prophecy of Jesus
about the destruction
of Jerusalem had to be fulfilled.
There it is.
In fact,
a few months after minting this coin,
Nero was forced
to send a military army
down to Judea to settle
the Jewish revolt with Cestius Gallus.
And these facts, we know,
led to the destruction of Jerusalem
and the temple in 70 C.E.
So, you see, a coin like this
can remind us of a precious lesson:
that Bible prophecies are always fulfilled,
even though the propaganda
of this world can say differently.
Hmm.
Nice lesson.
I see that you liked this story.
Would you like to know more
about Bible history and Rome?
Of course.
Yeah.
I have a short video to watch together.
Let’s see it.
Visiting some of the archaeological sites
of Italy
can help us to imagine
what life was like for the early Christians.
Would you like to come with me
for a quick tour?
Let’s begin here.
Located about ten kilometers,
or six miles, west of Naples
was the ancient port city of Puteoli.
Today, it is known as Pozzuoli.
In about 59 C.E.,
the apostle Paul
arrived here by boat as a prisoner.
From here, Paul would now begin
the long journey to Rome,
where he would eventually stand
before Caesar himself.
One of the most famous Roman highways
is called the Appian Way.
It averages 6 meters, or 20 feet, in width
and was paved with large lava blocks.
It was on this very road
that Paul traveled to the city of Rome.
Along the way,
Paul eventually came to a busy trading center
known as the Marketplace of Appius,
and a little further north
was a rest area (like an inn)
known as Three Taverns.
Having heard about Paul’s coming,
Christians from Rome
organized a group of brothers
to meet the apostle at both of these stops.
Acts 28:15
tells us that upon seeing them,
Paul “thanked God and took courage.”
Next, we come to the impressive ruins
of Ostia Antica.
This was Rome’s most important port.
It is about 25 kilometers,
or 16 miles, southwest of Rome.
We get a glimpse of Roman life
back then with its
multistory apartment buildings,
known as insulae, along with temples,
theaters, thermal baths, and shops.
Walking through the old streets,
it’s easy to imagine
our brothers witnessing to the people.
Perhaps they stopped to eat at a food shop
similar to this one called thermopolium,
where you could buy
bread, wine, roasted meat,
cheese, and have some refreshment.
Next, we arrive in Rome,
where perhaps the most well-known
monument stands.
Yes, you guessed it, the Colosseum.
The mammoth structure
was built in the first century C.E.
with a seating capacity
estimated to be from 40,000
to 87,000 persons.
This was Rome’s entertainment center.
There were mainly two types of games,
or exhibitions:
combat between two gladiators
and the hunting of wild animals.
Criminals were also put to death here.
Interestingly,
entry to the Colosseum was free.
This was part of the policy of the emperors,
who offered free entertainment
in order to keep the people under control.
In reality,
these spectacles were like a drug
that corrupted people’s consciences.
True Christians back then courageously
refused to take any part as spectators.
By the way, do you know where the Romans
got the funds to build this huge stadium?
They came from the conquest of Jerusalem
in 70 C.E.
In fact, there is even an inscription
at the Colosseum that reads:
“The Emperor Titus Caesar Vespasian Augustus
“ordered the new amphitheater
to be made from the proceeds
from the sale of the booty.”
To remember this important event,
Emperor Domitian had a triumphal arch
built in honor of his brother Titus,
who conquered Jerusalem
and later became emperor.
If you look carefully,
you can see a bas-relief
with a scene of Roman soldiers carrying
the spoils from Jerusalem
with the lampstand
taken from Jehovah’s temple.
The arch stands today
as a clear fulfillment of Jesus’ words
about the destruction
of Jerusalem and the temple.
So, you see, if we use the Bible as a map,
even the stones can be silent witnesses
that the Bible is a book of true history,
true life, and true prophecies.
I hope you enjoyed the tour.
Thank you for taking us
on that wonderful tour, Marco.
After seeing that video,
we all want to go to Italy ourselves
—don’t we?—
to see those sites in person.
Be prepared.
So, Mannie, let’s come back to you now.
What has been the highlight
of your Gilead training?
You know, I wasn’t raised in the truth.
So as a teenager,
I was interested in making sure
I improved my situation
by means of secular education.
I thought education was the answer.
I thought it was my ticket out.
And, boy, did Jehovah fool me.
How so?
Well, secular education
wasn’t the answer, but education was.
Jehovah knew I needed
the very best education—divine education.
Uh-huh.
And the truth is that what I’ve learned
from our Grand Instructor, Jehovah,
surpasses by far
anything that the secular education
could have provided me with.
It’s truly helped me see that, in fact,
the education that Jehovah provides us with
makes us better people.
So in Gilead School,
I have been able to appreciate how Jehovah
has continued to train us
and provide us with something that’s helpful,
not only to myself but to others.
And honestly,
I’m really grateful
that I’ve had this opportunity
to get better acquainted
with my heavenly Father.
Ah, well stated.
Now, tell us, a final question to you,
How do you plan on using in your assignment
what you’ve learned at Gilead?
I would tend to steer,
or guide, myself toward guidelines.
But Gilead has taught me
that while guidelines are important,
I can’t lose sight of what’s
more important to Jehovah, and that’s people.
Yes.
And Jesus knew that, and he saw that.
Therefore, I want to imitate
Jesus in my dealings with people.
When he was on earth,
who knew the rules better than Jesus?
Yet, what was his focus?
People.
He put people first.
He loved them.
He didn’t hold that against them.
In my assignment,
I hope to imitate Jesus fully
in that I can
balance guidelines with principles
but never lose sight
of loving Jehovah’s people.
Ah, that’s beautiful, a nice lesson learned.
Thank you for sharing that.
In fact, why don’t we get an expression
from the rest of you
on those very same questions?
How about you, Adalia?
What has been the highlight
of your Gilead training?
To be honest with you, Brother Chilton,
I came to Gilead very scared
and apprehensive of the unknown.
We understand.
Not knowing
what our future assignment might be
was very unsettling to me.
But after several lessons, I feel positive
and better equipped
for what the future holds for us.
We did a deep dive
into the Sermon on the Mount,
and one particular illustration touched me.
At Matthew 7:9, 10, Jesus asks:
‘Which father, when his son asks for a fish,
would hand him a serpent?’
Now, his listeners understood
that a fish could resemble a serpent,
so the illustration
took on a little bit more meaning.
Even though a son could have been
initially deceived if he received
a serpent,
a loving father would never do such a thing.
No.
So I realized that my heavenly Father,
Jehovah, would never give me something bad
and make it appear as something good.
So after meditating on this,
I realized that Jehovah
will only give me something
that will be beneficial for us.
And whatever he asks,
it will only be for my eternal happiness.
Ah, that’s beautiful.
Yeah, we pray that you have success in that.
And the final question
for you, Adalia,
How do you
hope to use in your assignment
what you’ve learned at Gilead?
I know our brothers and sisters
are going through a lot.
I want to be able to help strengthen
their faith the way mine has been upbuilt
by sharing with them
things that I’ve learned in school
and also just by being
a living example for them
and also making sure that they understand
that whatever challenge or trial
that they face,
Jehovah will sustain them.
There’s no doubt about it.
So with all that being said,
I know that we’re ready
for whatever the future holds for us.
And the way my faith has been strengthened
—it’s my treasure, my possession,
that I’m never going to let go of.
Oh, that’s beautiful.
Thank you for sharing with us.
Hanta, let’s ask you that question,
What has been the highlight
of Gilead training for you?
I’ve learned many times
—I’ve read in our publications many times—
that Jehovah never fails
to reward his faithful ones.
But Gilead helped me
to understand that more fully.
How do you mean?
For example,
Jehovah used Nebuchadnezzar
to conquer Tyre.
But Nebuchadnezzar and his men
did not get many things,
many riches from Tyre.
So it was as if Jehovah told him:
‘Nebuchadnezzar,
thank you very much for your labor to me.
Here I give you treasures from Egypt.’
Nebuchadnezzar was not His servant,
but He rewarded him
for the labor he did for Him.
So if Jehovah can do that
to someone who is not worshipping Him,
how much more so will He reward
those who are loyal to Him?
So that really strengthened me.
Oh, what a beautiful lesson learned!
Thank you.
Thank you for sharing that.
And a final question to you, Hanta,
How do you plan on using
what you’ve learned in your assignment
from what you’ve gathered here at Gilead?
Yes, when a sister comes to me
with her problem,
I quickly think of a solution,
even when the sister is still speaking.
Oh.
But Gilead has taught me
to listen and to show empathy.
The person may not need the solution at all.
Maybe what she needs is a listening ear.
But when help is needed, I’m determined
to use Bible principles
to reason with the person
and allow the person
to draw the conclusion.
So I’ll allow the person
to draw the conclusion herself.
We wish you success in that, Hanta.
Thank you so much for sharing that with us.
Shimon, let’s go over to you.
What has been the highlight
of your Gilead training?
For me,
the Growing Spiritually course lessons
had a huge impact.
I even changed my prayer a little bit.
For example, I used to pray to Jehovah,
“Please help me to show love
“to my wife
and friends and brothers and sisters.”
Good prayer.
But it’s a little bit vague.
But now I understand
what love is specifically.
Love is an unselfish quality,
focusing on doing good to others
regardless of the merit of the recipient
or any benefit I could get back.
So now I know
that when I pray to Jehovah to show love,
I am asking for help
to be a more unselfish person.
Ah, that’s beautiful.
That’s a good lesson you’ve learned.
Now, tell us, how do you plan
on using in your assignment
what you’ve gathered here at Gilead?
Yeah, you know, Brother Chilton,
the Gilead training made me understand
why I loved computers so much.
OK.
We have to know more on that one.
What do you mean?
Because I can program the computer
how to work,
and they will just work.
But people are not like that;
they are unpredictable,
and they don’t always do
what I want them to do.
So because of this, when I am focusing
on something technical,
it is not always easy for me
to switch my mind to love people.
So my goal is to love people
the way Jehovah loves them,
remembering they are doing their best
—as I am.
Ah, a good lesson learned.
Thank you for sharing that with us.
Let’s talk to your wife now.
Yoshi, what has been
the highlight of your training?
Yeah, well, I’m seeing
the fruitage of the spirit in a way
that I never thought of before.
Can I give an example?
Please.
So our culture
is generally viewed
as being humble and polite.
Gilead has taught me
that that kind of humility, though,
is not a result of the holy spirit,
or a fruitage of the holy spirit.
Gilead has taught me
that humility, love, kindness
—all those good qualities—
they have to come
from much, much deeper down,
not culture or your natural tendency
or personality.
It has to be driven by Jehovah,
by his holy spirit,
for it to be a fruitage of the holy spirit.
And that understanding
of Jehovah helping us in our good points
—that just really blew my mind.
OK, nice.
So how do you plan on using
in your assignment
what you’ve learned at Gilead, Yoshi?
Yes.
So the holy spirit’s power is very strong.
So my goal when I get to my new assignment
is to be able to expand my comfort zone,
widen out, with Jehovah’s help,
so that I can be more people-oriented
and that I can be comfortable with people.
And I hope
they’ll be comfortable with me too.
Ah, we have every confidence
that they will be.
Well done, Yoshi.
Thank you.
Now, finally, Marco,
you’re our last one here.
So, what has been the highlight
of your Gilead training?
I think that Gilead helped me
to love the Bible even more.
I realized that when digging into it,
the more I studied the Bible,
the more I found new things to learn
that I didn’t imagine.
And I could compare
the Bible now to a suitcase
with a double or triple bottom layer
and full of things
because the more I look into it,
the more I can take out more things
that maybe I didn’t see at the beginning.
So the lesson for me is
that when I study the Bible,
I should slow down
—take my time to meditate,
to find the different angles,
to study all the the aspects
—because nothing in the Bible
is random or written by chance.
Nice, nice lesson you’ve learned there.
And how do you plan on using
in your assignment what you’ve learned?
Yes, I think to be aware of how rich
the Bible is will help me in any assignment.
I’m more convinced that in any circumstance
I will face in the future (new circumstances
could be challenging or unexpected),
I think that the only thing I have to do
is to go back to the Bible
and look for a similar
situation or a lesson
or a Bible principle that can apply
because I’m sure that Jehovah
as a loving Father
has already written in the Bible
everything that I need.
Excellent.
Well done.
And we’ll pray for your success
in that too, Marco.
Well, we have thoroughly enjoyed
getting to know the six of you better,
and we appreciate so much
you sharing with us
your personal expressions.
We echo the words of the apostle Paul,
written at 2 Timothy 4:22,
when he said: “The Lord
“be with the spirit you show.
His undeserved kindness be with you.”
It is our prayer that Jehovah’s rich blessing
continue upon you six
and the rest of your Gilead class—156.
And to all of you in our viewing audience,
thank you for joining us.
We look forward to being with you again
on the next edition of The Inside Story.
We look forward to hearing
from Brother Gerrit Lösch today
for this principal talk.
Brother Lösch is our longest-serving member
of the Governing Body.
In fact, he just recently made 30 years
serving on the Governing Body.
So we look forward to his fine talk.
I think you’ll appreciate
the simplicity and power of his theme.
It is “Trust in Jehovah.”
“In God we trust,”
it says on U.S. dollar bills.
However, according to
the actual attitude of the people,
should it not rather say,
“In money we trust.”
However, trusting in money or riches
will lead to disappointment.
Proverbs 11:28 says:
“The one trusting in his riches will fall.”
As Jehovah’s Witnesses, we say:
“In Jehovah we trust.
Therefore, we will not fail.”
There are many reasons to trust Jehovah.
We are all impressed
by Jehovah’s works, aren’t we?
This includes nature,
and we are impressed
when we look at majestic mountains,
when we admire the beauty of flowers.
There are ever so many
different flowers in the world.
Which one do you like best?
Men can make artificial flowers,
but not real ones that reproduce.
Men can make beautiful jewelry
or other works of art;
however, men cannot produce, or make,
a single stem of grass,
not to speak of flowers or trees.
Should reflection on this
not make us humble?
Man cannot create any living thing,
but Jehovah can and did so.
Jesus commanded,
in connection with Matthew 6:28—
And he said, also, in this verse:
“Take a lesson from the lilies of the field,
how they grow;
“they do not toil, nor do they spin;
“but I tell you that not even Solomon
in all his glory
was arrayed as one of these.”
Yes, Jehovah is the Almighty,
and he created nature and man.
He did not need to create nature and us
in order for him to be happy.
He existed before he started to create
for an unknown length of time,
as we understand time.
Since when does Jehovah exist?
He always existed.
How can we understand this?
Suppose there was a time
when Jehovah did not exist yet.
Then nothing would exist now.
Why?
Because nothing can come from nothing.
The fact that we exist is proof
that Jehovah always existed.
It’s that simple.
Before Jehovah started to create,
he existed all alone.
But he did not feel lonely, did he?
He does not depend on others
or on things to feel happy.
The Bible says at 1 Timothy 1:11
that he is “the happy God.”
Jehovah exists
“from time indefinite to time indefinite”
and has complete knowledge
of the universe and history.
Psalm 90:1, 2 says:
“O Jehovah, . . .
from everlasting to everlasting,
you are God.”
Jehovah created the universe,
the earth, and man.
He desired to let others
share intelligent life and self-awareness
out of love.
It’s not that he needed other creatures
to feel happy,
and he didn’t also need
material things to feel happy.
He was happy since past eternity
before creation.
How loving that he created mankind
so that we can enjoy life
and friendship with him!
And what an expression
of his almightiness,
his wisdom, and his love!
It impresses on our mind and heart
how great Jehovah is.
When we encounter challenges
in our everyday lives,
meditating on Jehovah will help us
to endure challenges
and difficulties of all sorts
and to trust him.
You soon-to-be Gilead graduates
will seem to find this to be true
when you are confronted
with problems in the future.
If you experience problems, then what?
Pray to Jehovah.
His ability to hear prayers
is mind-boggling.
Is it not so that when we pray,
we have the feeling
that Jehovah at that moment
has nothing else in mind
or to do than just listen to us?
But he can listen
to tens of thousands of prayers
in hundreds of languages
all at the same time.
This includes prayers,
which are not presented audibly,
but silent prayers also spoken
in our heart and our mind.
How awesome!
This really strengthens
our trust and faith in him, doesn’t it?
The universe that Jehovah created
strengthens our trust in him.
We feel really small and insignificant
when we think about
how the universe got started about,
as scientists say,
18 to 20 billion years ago.
Let us consider a few facts
in connection with the universe that expands,
comments that were made about galaxies
that move into empty space,
empty space
where no galaxies or stars are yet.
Even with the newest telescope,
scientists have not reached the border
of the physical universe,
behind which there is nothing,
just empty space.
It is mind-boggling
to meditate on the universe.
Looking at the starry heaven at night,
have you ever wondered how far out
into space you’re actually peering
or how many stars you can see
with the naked eye?
At Psalm 8:3, 4,
David wrote about looking at the stars.
He said: “When I see your heavens,
“the works of your fingers,
“the moon and the stars
that you have prepared,
“what is mortal man
that you keep him in mind,
and a son of man
that you take care of him?”
It really can make us feel humble
to meditate on the universe.
How far into the universe
could David and can we peer?
At a distance of some
600,000 light years,
according to The Watchtower,
January 1, 1983.
It is estimated that our Milky Way alone
contains 200 to 400 billion stars.
The stars move with fantastic speed.
The Wikipedia Encyclopedia says:
“The speed of our solar system
circulating in our galaxy
“is about 220 kilometers per second
“and as scientists found out, at the speed
of 568,000 miles per hour.”
(End of quote)
It is estimated that a light beam
takes about 100,000 years
from one end of our Milky Way
to the other end.
If we look at our Milky Way
from outside our Milky Way
and from a different angle,
we would see it like a disk,
but we see it as a way
because of the location of our solar system
in the outskirts of the Milky Way.
In the book Guide to the Galaxy,
published in 1994, it says:
“It takes the solar system
“240 million years
“to complete the grand circuit
around the galaxy.
This speed is an absolute speed.”
(End of quote)
Astronomers estimated there
are approximately 100 billion
to 1 trillion galaxies in the universe.
But how many stars?
It is estimated between 10 sextillion
and 1 septillion,
if it means something to you.
You may wonder, ‘What is 1 septillion?’
Well, it is,
as we can see illustrated,
1 with 24 zeros,
that is, if you take 1 billion
and you multiply that by 1 quadrillion
(the next picture shows),
you get 1 septillion.
Can you follow?
It’s hard for me.
The Watchtower  of March 1, 1991,
raised the question:
“Where . . . is the source
of all the energy represented
“by the 100,000 million stars
“in our galaxy
[that’s just one galaxy],
“as well as the more than
1,000 million galaxies
that make up the visible universe?”
to quote from the 1991 Watchtower,  March 1.
The Bible encourages us
to meditate on the universe.
It strengthens our trust in Jehovah.
The Bible says:
“Raise your eyes high up and see.
“Who has created these things?
“It is the One who is bringing forth
the army of them by number,
“all of whom he calls even by name.
“Due to the abundance
of dynamic energy,
he also being vigorous in power,
not one [of them] is missing.”
Well, who is that One?
Of course, Jehovah.
Why is it good to talk about the universe
since it is so hard to fathom its size?
The universe proves
that Jehovah is Almighty.
And this inspires us
to trust in his prophecies
about putting an end to wickedness,
putting an end to the Devil,
and creating a paradise on earth
for all obedient mankind.
It’s good to reflect
on what David wrote about Jehovah
in Psalm 139.
In verses 1 to 5,
David is confident
of Jehovah’s interest in him.
Jehovah wants to hear from us.
We can share our innermost thoughts.
We can tell Jehovah anything
without being embarrassed.
So let’s look at the scripture.
Psalm 139 from verse 1:
“O Jehovah, you have searched through me,
and you know me.
“You know when I sit down
and when I rise up.
“You discern my thoughts from afar.
“You observe me
when I travel and when I lie down;
“you are familiar with all my ways.
“There is not a word
on my tongue, but look!
“O Jehovah, you already know it well.
“Behind and before me,
you surround me;
and you lay your hand upon me.”
So that’s a very impressive text, isn’t it?
In verses 6 to 13,
then David tried to comprehend
Jehovah’s greatness.
It was too much for him.
And so in verse 6, he goes on to say:
“Such knowledge
is beyond my comprehension.
“It is too high for me to reach.
“Where can I escape from your spirit,
“and where can I run away
from your face?
“If I were to ascend to heaven,
you would be there,
“and if I were to make my bed
in the Grave,
“look! you would be there.
“If I would fly away
with the wings of the dawn
“to reside by the most remote sea,
“even there your hand would lead me
“and your right hand
would take hold of me.
“If I say: ‘Surely darkness
will conceal me!’
“then the night around me
would become light.
“Even the darkness
would not be too dark for you,
“but night would be as bright as the day;
“darkness is the same as light to you.
“For you produced my kidneys;
you kept me screened off
in my mother’s womb.”
David is amazed at Jehovah’s wisdom
in creating the human body.
He gives all credit to Jehovah
for his extraordinary gift.
Verse 14 continues to say:
“I praise you because
in an awe-inspiring way
“I am wonderfully made.
“Your works are wonderful,
I know this very well.
“My bones were not hidden from you
when I was made in secret,
“when I was woven
in the depths of the earth [figuratively].
“Your eyes even saw me as an embryo;
“all its parts were written in your book
“regarding the days
when they were formed,
before any of them existed.”
So let’s read two more verses
and see the effect it had on David
and his complete trust and confidence
in his heavenly Father.
Verse 17: “So to me,
how precious your thoughts are!
“O God, how vast is the sum of them!
“If I try to count them,
“they outnumber the grains of sand.
When I awake, I am still with you.”
So we agree with David
that we are created in a wonderful way,
very impressive.
Well, think of, as an example,
of our ability
to use language and thought.
We are also unique
in our profound curiosity
about ourselves, aren’t we?
Different from all animals,
we are unique in our ability
to contemplate God’s thoughts.
This is one way
we are made in God’s image.
Think of our eyes—a marvel.
We have binocular vision
—able to distinguish the relationship
between different objects.
Think of our ears—a marvel.
We hear in stereo.
Now let’s talk about the universe
in our brain.
The book The Physics Factbook,
edited by Glenn Elert, says (and I quote):
“Weighing around 3 pounds,
“the brain contains
nearly 100 billion neurons.”
What are those?
Nerve cells—100 billion neurons.
If you don’t believe me, you can verify.
Count them yourself, yeah?
The brain is the most complicated organ
in the universe.
One reference works says
about these nerve cells
that they are as many
as the stars in the Milky Way galaxy.
It also has trillions
of supportive cells called glia.
Each neuron is connected to other neurons
by as many as
40,000 individual connections,
called synapses, between the cells.
The brain has more connections
than there are stars in the universe.
(End of quote)
No question we are wonderfully made
and all the praise belongs to Jehovah.
Being aware that Jehovah
created this fantastic universe,
the earth, and man,
does this not help us
to become more confident
in our trust in Jehovah
to be able and willing to help us
when we face problems or challenges?
Should we face persecution
or a ban on our work, then what?
Trust in Jehovah.
But Jehovah is not only all-powerful,
he is also love personified.
Jehovah is very interested
in you soon-to-be Gilead graduates.
Yes, he is interested in all of us.
He loves us.
He gave his beloved Son, Jesus Christ,
as a sacrifice for our sins
and for the purpose of helping us
to become perfect
and enjoy everlasting friendship with him.
Jehovah had full trust
and confidence in his Son’s faithfulness.
His love moves us to love.
“Love . . . is a perfect bond of union,”
says Colossians 3:14.
Yes, it is the most powerful bond
in the universe
—perfect love
bonding the Son and the Father
together unbreakably.
For like reasons,
God trusts his organization of servants,
knowing that love would hold most of them
immovably under test.
Psalm 56:11 says:
‘In God we have put our trust.’
Proverbs 3:5 encourages us:
“Trust in Jehovah with all your heart.”
Jesus is our best example.
When he was nailed to the torture stake,
his enemies mockingly said:
“He has put his trust in God;
“let Him now rescue him if He wants him,
for he said, ‘I am God’s Son.’”
On the other hand,
Jehovah trusts us as well.
How encouraging!
He trusts his organization of servants,
knowing that love
would hold most of them,
or most of us, immovable to him,
immovable under test,
and that his organization of creatures
would never stop doing so.
He trusted Abraham.
He trusted other patriarchs.
He trusts the anointed ones today.
He trusts the members of the great crowd
with an earthly hope.
Yes, Jehovah trusts you,
and we trust that you all
will continue to trust Jehovah forever.
Yes, in God we trust!
Well, now we come
to our presentation of the diplomas.
And so for this
I will be assisted by Brother Malenfant,
a helper to the Teaching Committee.
So we appreciate your help, young man.
Yes, thank you.
First of all,
we have Brother and Sister Achonu.
They will return to the Britain branch.
Brother and Sister Alvarez
will return to the Dominican Republic branch.
Brother and Sister Bakun
will return to the Poland branch.
Brother Caproni has been assigned
to the United States branch.
Brother and Sister Dumitran
will return to the France branch.
Brother and Sister Gonzalez
have been assigned to the Colombia branch.
Brother and Sister Heytens have been
assigned to the Congo (Kinshasa) branch.
Brother and Sister Hori
will return to the Japan branch.
Brother Khutsishvili has been assigned
to the Greece branch.
Brother Kocijančić
will return to the Croatia branch.
And Sister Koleva
will return to the Bulgaria branch.
Brother and Sister Kotoisuva
will return to the Fiji branch.
Brother and Sister Loukas
have been assigned to the Greece branch.
Brother and Sister Luna have been assigned
to the South Africa branch.
Brother Markin
will return to the Canada branch.
Brother and Sister Mastop
will return to the Netherlands branch.
Brother and Sister Matkovski
have been assigned to the Bulgaria branch.
Brother and Sister Orton have been assigned
to the Mozambique branch.
Brother Raunig
will return to the Central Europe branch.
Sister Razafimandimby
will return to the Madagascar branch.
Brother Rivera
will return to the Colombia branch.
And Brother and Sister Sideris
will return to the Canada branch.
Brother and Sister Toledo
will return to the United States branch.
Brother and Sister Volkmann
will return to the Serbia branch.
Brother and Sister Walker
have been assigned to the Brazil branch.
Brother and Sister Wicaksana
will return to the Indonesia branch.
I think Brother Malenfant
did a fantastic job!
But now it’s my pleasure to present to you
the graduates of the 156th class of Gilead.
Well, the class has written a letter
that they would like to read.
And so Brother Louis Walker from
the United States will read that for us now.
“To the Governing Body and Bethel family:
“After five months of intense Bible study,
“we are filled with so many emotions
“that it is hard to find words to express
“our appreciation and gratitude.
“We feel like Isaiah
“when he saw a vision of Jehovah
as described in Isaiah chapter 6.
“He saw Jehovah in a way he never had before,
“and the same is true of us.
“Gilead has helped us
to more deeply appreciate
“Jehovah’s beautiful personality,
“his matchless wisdom,
“and his unfailing love.
“Like Isaiah, at times
“we felt overwhelmed
with our imperfections and limitations.
“However, just as Jehovah
reassured Isaiah through a seraph,
“Jehovah lovingly encouraged us.
“During the past 20 weeks, we were cared for
“as ‘a nursing mother tenderly cares
“for her own children.’
“Our instructors became ‘beloved to us’
“as they shared not only their knowledge
and understanding of God’s Word
“but their ‘very selves.’
“We were encouraged
to always give Jehovah our best,
“to lower ourselves, and to lift others up.
“We learned the value
of not taking ourselves too seriously
“and to cherish our journey with Jehovah.
“We also deeply appreciate
our dear Governing Body.
“Despite your very busy schedules,
“you made time for us.
“Your heartfelt lectures motivated us
“to be courageous
“and to not fear the challenges we will face.
“We will never forget
your example of kindness,
“humility, and love.
“In ‘imitating your faith,’
“we are determined to remain loyal
“and submissive
to Jehovah and his organization
“as we go out to our assignments.
“Finally, our education
went beyond the Gilead classroom.
“We saw hospitality defined
“by you dear brothers and sisters
of the United States Bethel family.
“Your kindness and generosity
were outstanding!
“We were simply basking in your love.
“And although we did not have enough time
to get to know each one of you,
“it was enough time to fall in love with you.
“We will never be able
to thank our heavenly Father enough
“for this unique experience!
“We now echo the words of Isaiah,
who declared
“even before receiving details
of his new assignment:
“‘Here I am!
Send me!
“Send me!’
“As we depart for our respective assignments,
“we are confident,
thanks to this beautiful training,
“that Jehovah ‘will make us firm
and he will make us strong.’
“With hearts full of gratitude and love,
your brothers, the 156th class of Gilead.”
Well, we thank you for those sentiments.
It truly does reflect the appreciation
and spirituality of the entire class,
so we appreciate that very much.
And what a pleasure to be with you today!
Well, in our opening comments,
we talked a bit
about the privilege of being ones
whom Jehovah would use.
And remember, we reviewed examples
from Luke chapters 1 and 2
of humble, obedient ones
whom Jehovah appreciated,
like Mary, the humble shepherds,
Simeon, and Anna.
And the encouragement
was to imitate those fine examples,
and be the kind of people
whom Jehovah is pleased to use
by cultivating what matters most to Jehovah,
that is,
spiritual qualities that he holds dear
and that makes us useful to him.
But the fact is, you are ones
whom Jehovah is pleased to use.
In fact, all of Jehovah’s people
—all in the listening audience,
all of Jehovah’s people the world over—
Jehovah is pleased to use
because he has drawn each one.
We know that, don’t we?
John 6:44 tells us
(what does the verse say?):
“No man can come to me unless the Father,
who sent me,
draws him,
and I will resurrect him on the last day.”
So Jehovah has drawn each one of us
because he saw something
in our hearts of value.
He saw a humility and honesty
and a desire to learn the truth
and to serve the true and living God.
And so we have the privilege, then,
of being a part of Jehovah’s name people.
As individuals,
we have the privilege of having a place
in his great spiritual temple arrangement.
We are all on Jehovah’s team,
and the privilege that every one of us has,
of course,
is to bear his name
in the Kingdom preaching work.
But at times,
Jehovah also gives us other work to do
in other assignments that are
related to the Kingdom preaching work.
And for you, dear friends, that included
providing to you this training in Gilead.
And while this Gilead training
doesn’t place you above your brothers
—and you certainly do not feel that way—
it does indicate Jehovah’s approval of you
and the fact that he saw something good
in your hearts
that he could then continue to mold and train
so that he could use you to further help
and strengthen his people.
And quite likely it’s some of the same things
that he saw in Mary
and the shepherds and Simeon and Anna:
humility, deep spirituality, obedience,
loyalty, appreciation for spiritual things,
and constancy in your theocratic routine.
Be assured that Jehovah loves you
and that he approves of you
for these valuable qualities
that really make you useful to him.
And so our concluding encouragement is
to keep being the kind of people
whom Jehovah can use.
Really,
that’s at the heart of the encouragement
at Philippians 3:16: “At any rate,
to the extent we have made progress,
let us go on walking orderly
in this same [routine].”
Now, we think back
to our examples from Luke chapters 1 and 2.
And we don’t hear again
about Simeon and Anna,
although we are sure that they remained
faithful for the rest of their lives.
But we do follow Mary
as she continued in her service to Jehovah
and the years went by as she raised Jesus
and her other children along with Joseph
to love and serve Jehovah.
We watched as Mary appreciatively
‘preserved these things in her heart’
that Jehovah was doing
in connection with her son
and his Son, of course, Jehovah’s.
And we also follow Mary as she
possibly dealt with the death of her husband
at some point along the way
and as she dealt
with the initial lack of faith
of her other children in Jesus’ Messiahship
and then finally as she watched her son die
in a most shameful and painful way
on that torture stake,
when Simeon’s words came true
that ‘a long sword would be run through her.’
Jehovah’s confidence in Mary was well-placed.
She continued to be the kind of person
whom he could use.
And so follow her good example
by being one whom Jehovah
can continue to use
and by focusing
on what matters most to Jehovah.
Keep cultivating the qualities
that will endear you to Jehovah.
And then whatever work needs to be done,
whatever assignment needs to be filled,
whatever encouragement needs to be given,
well, then, you will be spiritually qualified
and you will be ready to be used by Jehovah
if that is his desire.
Yes, continue to be one whom Jehovah
would use in his service,
and then you will always have his favor
and you will have joy and contentment
in whatever
Jehovah has in mind for you to do.
We hope you enjoyed
this portion of the graduation.
Be on the lookout for the rest of the program
as it’s released on jw.org during this month.
To conclude, our postcard
takes us to the southern tip of Africa.
Welcome to Eswatini.
This tiny landlocked country,
once known as Swaziland,
sits between Mozambique and South Africa.
You can find magnificent wildlife
in Hlane National Park
or stand in amazement
beside Sibebe Rock,
one of the world’s largest granite domes.
Tradition has an important place
in Eswatini culture.
How men or women tie lihiya fabric
over their shoulders
communicates whether they are
married or single.
The country also has kept
the tradition of an absolute monarchy.
King Sobhuza II reigned for 82 years
until his death in 1982
and had quite the rapport
with Jehovah’s Witnesses.
In 1933,
the king was delighted
with the message carried by pioneers
and called his personal bodyguard
of 100 warriors
to listen as well.
On another occasion,
he offered to buy
the loudspeaker and the records
our brothers were using.
They humbly explained,
“It all belongs to another King.”
Sobhuza wanted to know who this was.
“He is Jesus Christ.”
Sobhuza replied: “Oh, he’s a great King.
I don’t want to take anything
that belongs to him.”
Our brothers continue loyally announcing
God’s Kingdom.
Currently, there are
over 3,000 publishers
conducting
over 4,000 Bible studies.
The country also hosts
refugees from Burundi, Rwanda, Uganda,
and various other countries.
And publishers go to the camp
to preach, extending a warm welcome
and a message of hope.
You can feel the love our brothers
in the Nkoyoyo Congregation
have for neighbor and each other.
They wish to send that love to you,
the worldwide brotherhood.
From the World Headquarters
of Jehovah’s Witnesses,
this is JW Broadcasting!